{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\lang3081\kerning28\ul\fs28 Glossary of Linguistic and Typographic Terms:\par
\par
\ulnone\fs20 All definitions in this glossary were originally sourced from Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org).  Some definitions have been edited.\par
\par
-Accent\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b linguistics\b0 , an accent is a pronunciation characteristic of a particular group of people relative to another group. \par
- related topic: Dialect, Received Pronunication, General American\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Allographs (Note: allograph has multiple meanings)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Two or more \b glyphs \b0 representing the same \b grapheme\b0 , either interchangeably or context-dependent, are called allographs.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Allophones\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b phonetics\b0 , an allophone is one of several similar \b phones \b0 that belong to the same \b phoneme\b0 . A phone is a sound that has a definite shape as a sound wave, while a phoneme is a basic group of sounds that can distinguish words (i.e. changing one phoneme in a word can produce another word); speakers of a particular language perceive a phoneme as a single distinctive sound in that language. Thus an allophone is a phone considered as a member of one phoneme.\par
For example, [p\u688?] as in pin and [p] as in spin are allophones for the phoneme /p/.  (ie. The two p's in the example sound different so they are two different phones but since there exists no \b minimal pair \b0 for these two phones they are allophones of the same phoneme.)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\par
- ASCII\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), generally pronounced ask-ee, is a character encoding based on the English alphabet. ASCII codes represent text in computers, communications equipment, and other devices that work with text. \par
- related topic: Unicode\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\par
-Consonant\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In articulatory \b phonetics\b0 , a consonant is a sound in spoken language that is characterized by complete or partial closure of the upper vocal tract, the upper vocal tract being defined as that part of the vocal tract that lies above the larynx.\par
The word consonant comes from Latin and means "sounding with" or "sounding together," the idea being that consonants don't sound on their own, but occur only with a nearby \b vowel\b0 , which is the case in Latin. However, this conception is not adequate, since in languages such as Nux\'e1lk, consonants may occur without any vowels.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: Diphthong, Vowel\par
\par
- Diacritic\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A diacritic or diacritical mark, also called an accent, is a small sign added to a letter to alter pronunciation or to distinguish between similar words. Eg: ' \'e2 ' has a circumflex diacritic above the 'a'.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Dialect\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A dialect is a variety of a language characteristic of a particular group of the language's speakers.  The term is applied most often to regional speech patterns, but a dialect may also be defined by other factors, such as social class.\par
A dialect is distinguished by its vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation (phonology, including prosody). Where a distinction can be made only in terms of pronunciation, the term \b accent \b0 is appropriate, not dialect (although in common usage, "dialect" and "accent" are usually synonymous).\par
- related topic: Accent\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Digraph / Trigraph\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A digraph, bigraph or digram is a pair of characters used to write one \b phoneme \b0 (distinct sound) or a sequence of phonemes that does not correspond to the normal values of the two characters combined. The sound is often, but not necessarily, one which cannot be expressed using a single character in the \b orthography \b0 used by the language. Usually, the term "digraph" is reserved for \b graphemes \b0 whose pronunciation is always or nearly always the same. Eg: 'sh' for the first phoneme found in the words 'she', 'shiver', 'show'.\par
\par
Similarly a trigraph is a group of three letters used to represent a single sound or a combination of sounds that does not correspond to the written letters combined. Eg: 'igh' for the vowel (a diphthong) sound found in the words 'fight', 'night', 'tight'.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li1440\sl240\slmult1\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Diphthong / Triphthong\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b phonetics\b0 , a diphthong (also gliding \b vowel\b0 ) is a \b monosyllabic \b0 vowel combination involving a quick but smooth movement from one vowel to another, often interpreted by listeners as a single vowel sound or phoneme. While "pure" vowels, or monophthongs, are said to have one target tongue position, diphthongs have two target tongue positions. Pure vowels are represented in the \b International Phonetic Alphabet \b0 by one symbol: English "sum" as /s\u652?m/, for example. Diphthongs are represented by two symbols, for example English "same" as /se\u618?m/, where the two vowel symbols are intended to represent approximately the beginning and ending tongue positions.\par
\par
Similarly a triphthong is a monosyllabic vowel combination usually involving a quick but smooth movement from one vowel to another that passes over a third one.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li1440\sl240\slmult1\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: Consonant, Vowel\par
\par
-Distinctive Feature\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b linguistics\b0 , a distinctive feature is the most basic unit of \b phonological \b0 structure that may be analyzed in phonological theory.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Disyllable / Disyllabic : see \b Syllable\b0\par
\par
- Feature : see \b Distinctive Feature\b0\par
\par
- Font : see \b Typeface\b0\par
\par
- Functional Load\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b linguistics \b0 and especially \b phonology\b0 , functional load refers to the importance of certain features in making distinctions in a language. English vowels, for example, have a very high functional load: There are innumerable sets of words distinguished (see \b minimal pair\b0 ) just by their vowels, such as pin, pen, pan, pun, pain, pine. Voicing is similar, as can be seen in pat - bad, sue - zoo. Speakers who do not control these differences will be very difficult to understand\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - General American\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 General American (sometimes called Standard Midwestern, Standard Spoken American English or American Broadcast English) is one of the most homogeneous and widespread \b accents \b0 of Anglophone North America. It is the accent of American English perceived by Americans to be most "neutral" and free of regional characteristics.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Glyph\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b typography\b0 , a glyph\b  \b0 is the shape given in a particular \b typeface \b0 to a specific \b grapheme \b0 or symbol.\par
The term for the abstract entity represented by a glyph is character: a typographical character may be a grapheme (an element of a writing system), but also a numeral, a punctuation mark, or a pictorial or decorative symbol (such as dingbats, or \b Unicode's \b0 "Miscellaneous Symbols").\par
Two or more glyphs representing the same grapheme, either interchangeably or context-dependent, are called \b allographs\b0 . \par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Grapheme\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b typography\b0 , a grapheme is the fundamental unit in written language. Graphemes include alphabetic letters, Chinese characters, numerals, punctuation marks, and all the individual symbols of any of the world's writing systems.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 The International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) is a system of phonetic notation based on the Latin alphabet, devised by the International Phonetic Association as a standardized representation of the sounds of spoken language.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: Sampa / X-Sampa\par
\par
- Lexical sets\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A lexical set is a group of words which share a similar \b phonetic feature\b0 . The lexical set says nothing about the specific realisation of its feature (its exact pronunciation), only that all the words in that set will have more or less the same pronunciation for that feature.\par
One common use of lexical sets is for vowel categories or equivalence classes in the English language. Throughout the \b phonological \b0 history of the English language, there have been numerous \b splits \b0 and \b mergers\b0 , with the result that various \b accents \b0 and \b dialects \b0 make different distinctions between vowels. For example, some speakers of English pronounce luck and look identically, while others pronounce look and Luke identically, while still others distinguish between all three of luck, look, Luke. It is not possible, therefore, to say that, for example, sound A in dialect X corresponds to sound B in dialect Y.\par
However, it is possible to identify a number of lexical sets: groups of words which will have the same vowel sound in all or most varieties of English, and use these to talk about, for example, the specific pronunciation of the vowel characterising a particular lexical set in a particular variety of English.\par
In the example above, the words luck, look, Luke belong the lexical sets STRUT, FOOT, GOOSE, respectively. A common convention is to choose a particular keyword which is part of the set and to use this word, in upper case, to identify the entire set.\par
Lexical sets mean, for example, that people pronounce words in FOOT (such as good, full, bush) with the same vowel -- they do not say whether or not this vowel is distinct from that of, say, luck or Luke. In other words, lexical sets are intended to convey all distinctions that occur in the varieties of English under consideration, regardless of whether all those distinctions are present in any particular variety.\par
- See Also: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_set for a list of the common 24 lexical sets.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\par
- Linguistics\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Linguistics is the scientific study of language, which can be theoretical or applied. Someone who engages in this study is called a linguist.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Minimal Pair\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b phonology\b0 , minimal pairs are pairs of words or phrases in a particular language, which differ in only one phonological element, such as a \b phone\b0 , \b phoneme\b0 , toneme or chroneme and have a distinct meaning. They are used to demonstrate that two phones constitute two separate phonemes in the language.\par
As an example for English vowels, the pair "let" + "lit" proves that the phones [\u603?] (in let) and [\u618?] (in lit) do in fact represent distinct phonemes /\u603?/ and /\u618?/. An example for English consonants is the minimal pair of "pat" + "bat". \par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Mergers\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A merger is where two (or more) phonemes merge over time and become indistinguishable.\par
eg: in General American the vowel sounds in caught and cot have merged to be the same sound.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab  - related topic: Splits\par
\par
- Monosyllable / Monosyllabic : see \b Syllable\b0\par
\par
- Orthography\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 The orthography of a language specifies the correct way of using a specific writing system to write the language. (Where more than one writing system is used for a language, for example for Kurdish, there can be more than one orthography.) Orthography is distinct from \b typography\b0 .\par
Orthography describes or defines the set of \b symbols\b0  (\b graphemes \b0 and \b diacritics\b0 ) used, and the rules about how to write these symbols. Depending on the nature of the writing system, the rules may include punctuation, spelling and capitalization.\par
While "orthography" colloquially is often used synonymously with spelling, spelling is only part of orthography.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phone\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Within \b phonetics\b0 , a phone is:\par
\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\nowidctlpar\fi-360\li1440\sl240\slmult1 a speech sound or gesture considered a physical event without regard to its place in the \b phonology \b0 of a language \par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}a speech \b segment \b0 that possesses distinct physical or perceptual properties \par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}a particular occurrence of a speech segment \par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}the basic unit revealed via phonetic speech analysis \par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phoneme\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In human language, a \b phoneme \b0 is the smallest unit of speech that distinguishes meaning. Phonemes are not the physical \b segments \b0 themselves, but abstractions of them. An example of a phoneme would be the /t/ found in words like tip, stand, writer, and cat.\par
A phoneme can include slightly different sounds or \b phones\b0 . For instance, the p sound in the English words pin and spin is pronounced differently. In some languages, such as Korean, these phones would be considered different phonemes. But English does not distinguish them, so in English both are considered to be a single /p/ phoneme. Two phones that belong to the same phoneme are called \b allophones\b0 . A common test to determine whether two phones are allophones or separate phones relies on finding so-called \b minimal pairs\b0 : words that differ only by the phones in question.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li1440\sl240\slmult1\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phonemic Orthography\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A phonemic orthography is a writing system where the written \b graphemes \b0 correspond to \b phonemes\b0 , the spoken sounds of the language. \par
Phonemic orthographies are different from \b phonetic transcription\b0 ; whereas in a phonemic orthography, \b allophones \b0 will usually be represented by the same grapheme, a purely phonetic script would demand that phonetically distinct \b allophones \b0 be distinguished. To take an example from American English: the /t/ sound in the words "table" and "cat" would, in a phonemic orthography, be written with the same character; however, a strictly phonetic script would make a distinction between the aspirated "t" in "table", the flap in "butter", the unaspirated "t" in "stop" and the glottalized "t" in "cat" (not all these allophones exist in all English dialects). In other words, the sound that most English speakers think of as /t/ is really a group of sounds, all pronounced slightly differently depending on where they occur in a word. A perfect phonemic orthography has one letter per group of sounds (phoneme), with different letters only where the sounds distinguish words (so "bed" is spelled differently from "bet").\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phonetics\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Phonetics is the study of the sounds of human speech. It is concerned with the actual properties of speech sounds (\b phones\b0 ), and their production, audition and perception, while \b phonology\b0 , which emerged from it, studies sound systems and abstract sound units (such as \b phonemes \b0 and \b distinctive features\b0 ). Phonetics deals with the sounds themselves rather than the contexts in which they are used in languages.\par
- related topic: Phonemes, IPA, Sampa / X-Sampa\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phonetic Transcription\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Phonetic transcription (or phonetic notation) is the visual system of symbolization of the sounds occurring in spoken human language. The most common type of phonetic transcription uses a phonetic alphabet (such as the \b International Phonetic Alphabet\b0 ).\par
In all systems of transcription it is possible to distinguish between broad transcription and narrow transcription. Broad transcription indicates only the more noticeable phonetic features of an utterance, whereas narrow transcription encodes more information about the phonetic variations of the specific \b allophones \b0 in the utterance.  A broad transcription may resemble a \b phonemic orthography\b0 . \par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Phonology (Phonematics)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Phonology is a subfield of \b linguistics \b0 which studies the sound system of a specific language (or languages). Whereas \b phonetics \b0 is about the physical production and perception of the sounds of speech, phonology describes the way sounds function within a given language or across languages.\par
An important part of phonology is studying which sounds are distinctive units within a language. In English, for example, /p/ and /b/ are distinctive units of sound, (i.e., they are \b phonemes \b0 / the difference is phonemic, or phonematic). This can be seen from \b minimal pairs\b0  such as "pin" and "bin", which mean different things, but differ only in one sound. On the other hand, /p/ is often pronounced differently depending on its position relative to other sounds, yet these different pronunciations are still considered by native speakers to be the same "sound". For example, the /p/ in "pin" is aspirated while the same \b phoneme \b0 in "spin" is not. In some other languages, for example Thai and Quechua, this same difference of aspiration or non-aspiration does differentiate phonemes.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Polysyllable / Polysyllabic : see \b Syllable\b0\par
\par
- Received Pronunciation (RP)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Received Pronunciation (RP) is a form of pronunciation of the English language which has been long perceived as uniquely prestigious amongst British accents.\par
Received Pronunciation may be referred to as the Queen's (or King's) English, on the grounds that it is spoken by the monarch. It is also sometimes referred to as BBC English, because it was traditionally used by the BBC, yet nowadays these notions are slightly misleading. Queen Elizabeth II uses one specific form of English, whilst BBC presenters and staff are no longer bound by one type of accent.\par
- related topic: Accent\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Rhotic Accent\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 English pronunciation is divided into two main accent groups, the rhotic and non-rhotic, depending on when the sound typically represented in spelling with the letter R is pronounced. Rhotic speakers pronounce written /r/ in all positions, while non-rhotic speakers pronounce /r/ only if it is followed by a vowel sound, and not always even then.\par
Most speakers of American English are rhotic. Outside the United States, rhotic accents can be found in Barbados, Canada, Ireland and Scotland. In England, rhotic accents are found in the West Country, the Corby area and most of Lancashire; they were traditionally across the whole of Lancashire and bordering parts of Yorkshire, Northumberland and rural parts of south-east England, although the younger generation are more likely to be non-rhotic in these areas. Other areas with rhotic accents include the Philippines, and Otago and Southland in the far south of New Zealand's South Island, where a Scottish influence is apparent.\par
Areas with non-rhotic accents include India (particularly in southern India and Maharashtra), Africa, Australia, Malta, most of the Caribbean, most of England (notably Received Pronunciation speakers), most of New Zealand and Wales. Singapore, Malaysia and Hong Kong are mostly non-rhotic.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\par
- Sampa / X-Sampa\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 The Speech Assessment Methods Phonetic Alphabet (SAMPA) is a computer-readable phonetic script using 7-bit printable ASCII characters, based on the \b International Phonetic Alphabet\b0  (IPA).\par
\par
The Extended SAM (Speech Assessment Methods) Phonetic Alphabet (X-SAMPA) is a variant of SAMPA designed to unify the individual language SAMPA alphabets, and extend SAMPA to cover the entire range of characters in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).\par
\par
- See Also: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X-SAMPA for a list of the SAMPA symbols.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: IPA\par
\par
- Segments\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b linguistics \b0 (and \b phonetics\b0 ), segment is used primarily \ldblquote to refer to any discrete unit that can be identified, either physically or auditorily, in the stream of speech\rdblquote  (after A Dictionary of Linguistics & Phonetics, David Crystal, 2003, pp. 408\endash 409).\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\par
- Splits\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In a phonemic split a \b phoneme \b0 at an earlier stage of the language is divided into two phonemes over time.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: Merger\par
\par
- Syllable\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A syllable is a unit of organization for a sequence of speech sounds. It is typically made up of a syllable nucleus (most often a \b vowel\b0 ) with optional initial and final margins (typically, \b consonants\b0 ).\par
Syllables are often considered the phonological "building blocks" of words. \par
A word that consists of a single syllable (like English cat) is called a monosyllable (such a word is monosyllabic), while a word consisting of two syllables (like monkey) is called a disyllable (such a word is disyllabic). A word consisting of three syllables (such as indigent) is called a trisyllable (the adjective form is trisyllabic). A word consisting of more than three syllables (such as intelligence) is called a polysyllable (and could be described as polysyllabic), although this term is often used to describe words of two syllables or more.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Trigraph : see \b Digraph\b0\par
\par
- Triphthong : see \b Diphthong\b0\par
\par
- Trisyllable / Trisyllabic : see \b Syllable\b0\par
\par
- Type Design\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Type design is the art of designing \b typefaces.\b0\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Typeface (Font)\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 A typeface is a coordinated set of \b glyphs \b0 designed with stylistic unity. A typeface usually comprises an alphabet of letters, numerals, and punctuation marks; it may also include ideograms and symbols, or consist entirely of them, for example, mathematical or map-making symbols.The term typeface is typically conflated with font, which had distinct meanings before the advent of desktop publishing. These terms are now effectively synonymous when discussing digital typography. One still valid distinction between font and typeface is that a font may designate a specific member of a type family such as roman, bold or italic type, possibly in a particular size, while typeface designates a visual appearance or style, possibly of a related set of fonts. For example, a given typeface such as Arial may include roman, bold, and italic fonts.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Typography\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Typography is the art and techniques of \b type design\b0 , modifying type \b glyphs\b0 , and arranging type.\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Unicode\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 Unicode is an industry standard allowing computers to consistently represent and manipulate text expressed in most of the world's writing systems. Unicode, in intent, encodes the characters of writing systems \emdash  \b graphemes \b0 and grapheme-like units \emdash  rather than the variant \b glyphs \b0 (renderings) for such characters.\par
- related topic: ASCII\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1 - Vowel\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\sl240\slmult1 In \b phonetics\b0 , a vowel is a sound in spoken language that is characterized by an open configuration of the vocal tract so that there is no build-up of air pressure above the glottis. This contrasts with \b consonants\b0 , which are characterized by a constriction or closure at one or more points along the vocal tract. A vowel is also understood to be syllabic: an equivalent open but non-syllabic sound is called a semivowel.\par
In all languages, vowels form the nucleus or peak of syllables, whereas consonants form the onset and (in languages which have them) coda. However, some languages also allow other sounds to form the nucleus of a \b syllable\b0 , such as the syllabic l in the English word table ['te\u618?.bl\u809?] (the stroke under the l indicates that it is syllabic; the dot separates syllables), or the r in the Serbo-Croatian words vrba [vr\u809?.ba] "willow" or vrt "garden".\par
The word vowel comes from the Latin word vocalis, meaning "speaking", because in most languages words and thus speech are not possible without vowels.\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\sl240\slmult1\tab - related topic: Consonant, Diphthong\par
\par
- X-Sampa : see \b Sampa\b0\par
}
 